---
layout: post
title: What exactly is data science? 
---

Though a myriad of articles and blogs defining data science and distinguishing it from similar fields of interest -- like statistics and machine learning -- exist, it has remained a fairly nebulous concept to me. In a recent series of readings, I walked through the various thoughts of four individuals on the convergence and divergence of these practices. It was difficult to discern whether or not their ideas on data science were fully parallel. What I did emerge with were some unique (at least relative to these articles) ideas on what data science means to me.

Data science is the convergence of industry & institutional knowledge, product and/or service knowledge, and statistical know-how. While applied statistics is the foundational core underlying data science, it doesn’t fully explain the range of duties and competencies needed for the position in terms of today's job descriptions. In addition to having a thorough understanding of statistics, a data scientist needs to intimately understand the needs and goals that will grow and move an organization forward as well as the ability to put the results of its statistical findings to work for the organization. While there does not seem to be a clear consensus on whether or not machine learning in nestled within data science or is an extension of data science, one thing that is clear is that a data scientist actively drives those results to a deployable use where statisticians traditionally have not been operative, instead interpreting results and turning those over to a separate business unit to explore, and ultimately, determine business use. Often times, data scientists must also possess deep knowledge of technical platforms and applications in order to develop the best model to push to production (where machine learning comes into play).  

As described above, I would summarize by saying data scientists are statisticians with a broader set of responsibilities and competencies. I see data scientists as a hybrid of statisticians, business analysts, and corporate leaders, as business analysts typically liaise across business units to understand their operations, goals and needs then work collaboratively to find solutions; statisticians collect, clean and analyze data for trends and predictive insights; and leaders generally have the responsibility and polish to deliver critical insights to key decision-makers in an organization. 

While there do seem to be some distinguishing characteristics of statisticians and data scientists, I think this is the product of historical staffing trends and employee traits, and not necessarily an inherent, underlying distinction of the two occupations. In my academic experience with statistics and econometrics, there’s always been an applied approach. Yes, it is important to grasp statistical theory, but the recognition that there are actionable applications for statistics outside of academia has always been present. Programming, predictive analysis, and discussion of applicable uses in the "real world" has always been pervasive in my coursework – so, to me, I don’t view statistics (and statisticians) as being necessarily limited to reactively running statistical analyses in a silo based on directives given by someone else and then handing the results off to be examined by another unit of the same business. I see statisticians as very much capable of driving the entire data and analytics “life cycle” – from identifying needs, collecting relevant data, analyzing data for insights, and providing recommendations on how to utilize those insights to address and/or benefit whatever, whether it be a business, government, or society. As time passes and continues to shape data science, I believe we will begin to see these two occupational titles used more interchangeably. 

